---
title: Chapter 1
---

# Chapter 1
{:.no_toc}

*	Jekyll will generate a list of page headings here. Delete this one-item list (and the {:toc} that follows it) if you don't want it.
{:toc}

This is a regular paragraph. If it follows a heading, list, definition list, blockquote or iframe, it'll be flush left (not indented). If you're looking at the HTML, ebook or print version, you should also check out the underlying markdown version, to see how to control styles with simple, plain-text formatting. There is more detail in the book framework's [README](https://github.com/electricbookworks/book-framework). 

In the markdown source of this chapter, note the `chapter` style in the markdown version's YAML header – at the top of the document. That's important: it tells the stylesheet what part of the book this is.

## Better than lorem ipsum

Who needs lorem ipsum when you can read the real thing? Here's some [Cicero translated by E. S. Shuckburgh](http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/2812/pg2812.txt).

### To Terentia, Tulliola, and Young Cicero (at Rome) 

To get all small caps, wrap the text in asterisks, tagged `{:.allsmallcaps}`
{:.sidenote}

*BRUNDISIUM, 29 APRIL*{:.allsmallcaps}—Yes, I do write to you less often than I might, because, though I am always wretched, yet when I write to you or read a letter from you, I am in such floods of tears that I cannot endure it. Oh, that I had clung less to life![^1] I should at least never have known real sorrow, or not much of it, in my life. Yet if fortune has reserved for me any hope of recovering at any time any position again, I was not utterly wrong to do so: if these miseries are to be permanent, I only wish, my dear, to see you as soon as possible and to die in your arms, since neither gods, whom you have worshipped with such pure devotion, nor men, whom I have ever served, have made us any return. 

[^1]: This is a footnote. Footnotes created like this, following [kramdown's footnote syntax](http://kramdown.gettalong.org/syntax.html#footnotes), actually behave as endnotes to the document they're in. For sidenotes see [chapter 2](2.html).

> This is a blockquote tagged as a `{:.shout}` – useful for pull quotes. Like this: I only wish, my dear, to see you as soon as possible and to die in your arms.
{:.shout}

I have been thirteen days at Brundisium in the house of M. Laenius Flaccus, a very excellent man, who has despised the risk to his fortunes and civil existence in comparison to keeping me safe, nor has been induced by the penalty of a most iniquitous law to refuse me the rights and good offices of hospitality and friendship.[^3] May I sometime have the opportunity of repaying him! Feel gratitude I always shall. I set out from Brundisium on the 29th of April, and intend going through Macedonia to Cyzicus. 

[^3]: This is another footnote. Note how kramdown automatically numbers the footnotes correctly, even if the markdown doesn't. The reference is superscript. We can also do subscript, like H<sub>2</sub>0, using HTML `<sub>` tags. Our framework doesn't yet handle complex maths by default, but it may in future, using [MathJax](http://kramdown.gettalong.org/math_engine/mathjax.html).

What a fall! What a disaster! What can I say? Should I ask you to come--a woman of weak health and broken spirit? Should I refrain from asking you? Am I to be without you, then? 

> This is a blockquote tagged as a `{:.box}`. I think the best course is this: if there is any hope of my restoration, stay to promote it and push the thing on.
> 
> But if, as I fear, it proves hopeless, pray come to me by any means in your power. Be sure of this, that if I have you I shall not think myself wholly lost. 
{:.box}

But what is to become of my darling Tullia? You must see to that now: I can think of nothing. But certainly, however things turn out, we must do everything to promote that poor little girl's married happiness and reputation. Again, what is my boy Cicero to do? Let him, at any rate, be ever in my bosom and in my arms. 

> This is a regular blockquote. I can't write more. A fit of weeping hinders me. I don't know how you have got on; whether you are left in possession of anything, or have been, as I fear, entirely plundered. Piso, as you say, I hope will always be our friend. 

As to the manumission of the slaves you need not be uneasy. To begin with, the promise made to yours was that you would treat them according as each severally deserved. So far Orpheus has behaved well, besides him no one very markedly so. With the rest of the slaves the arrangement is that, if my property is forfeited, they should become my freedmen, supposing them to be able to maintain at law that status. But if my property remained in my ownership, they were to continue slaves, with the exception of a very few. But these are trifles. 

See the framework [README](https://github.com/electricbookworks/book-framework#the-ebw-book-framework) on how to embed video like this. This paragraph and the video won't appear in the print edition.
{:.non-printing}

{% include youtube-start.html %}KuuLhizAqo8{% include youtube-end.html %}

To return to your advice, that I should keep up my courage and not give up hope of recovering my position, I only wish that there were any good grounds for entertaining such a hope. As it is, when, alas! shall I get a letter from you? Who will bring it me? I would have waited for it at Brundisium, but the sailors would not allow it, being unwilling to lose a favourable wind. 

For the rest, put as dignified a face on the matter as you can, my dear Terentia. Our life is over: we have had our day: it is not any fault of ours that has ruined us, but our virtue. I have made no false step, except in not losing my life when I lost my honours. But since our children preferred my living, let us bear everything else, however intolerable. And yet I, who encourage you, cannot encourage myself. 

If you want to start a new section of paragraphs, with space above and no indent, tag the paragraph with `{:.first}` in the markdown, like this one. I have sent that faithful fellow Clodius Philhetaerus home, because he was hampered with weakness of the eyes. Sallustius seems likely to outdo everybody in his attentions. Pescennius is exceedingly kind to me; and I have hopes that he will always be attentive to you. Sicca had said that he would accompany me; but he has left Brundisium. 
{:.first}

Take the greatest care of your health, and believe me that I am more affected by your distress than my own. My dear Terentia, most faithful and best of wives, and my darling little daughter, and that last hope of my race, Cicero, good-bye! 

A valediction, 29 April, from Brundisium
{:.valediction}

For more typography, [see chapter 2](2.html).
